Add RFC for v2 providers interface and prepare for new services APIs (#2)
Qiskit/rfcs: text/###-v2-provider-interface.md

> # Improved Provider Interface

Reviewer: You don't like the header ;)?

Author: Oops, I completely forgot about that. I based this from an old gist I wrote to share some ideas on this and forgot to add the header when I adapted it for this. Fixed in: https://github.com/Qiskit/rfcs/pull/2/commits/d854980f610eacb8c2fbcda2ff2cdf1be3464cbd

is no reason to convert an object to a json like structure when the simulator
can just interact with it directly. Passing native objects around directly is
much faster and simpler.

## User Benefit
The main target for this work is provider authors and qiskit developers,
since the pain points of working with the current interface are isolated
to the development of qiskit or qiskit plugins. But all users of qiskit
will benefit from performance imprpovements gained by the new interface
because we won't be performing needless conversions everytime we run
experiments. Another general benefit is this will result in a cleaner and
better documented interface for working with backends and results.

Additionally, it makes the domains of what's part of IBMQ/IQX and what's part
of terra much clearer. Right now to make changes to terra's interfaces this
often gets caught up in how iqx works today and limits what is possible.

## Design Proposal

The transition will happen in 2 stages. The first stage, v1.5 which is
a maintanence change for terra is to remove marshmallow from the existing
providers interface. This will make things more transparent in how they are

> built simplifying andy time we need to work with the interface, but also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
built, not just simplifying working with the interface, but also
```

significantly speed up the performance of the current interface. The first
piece of this has been pushed for the qobj class here:

https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/3383

This basically just mirrors the marshmallow class heirarchy and replaces each
class with a flat class with just attributes for each element in the schema.
The removal of marshmallow will need to be replicated for backends, jobs, and
results too before we can move on to the new interface.

This is needed for 3 reasons. The first is that the providers interface has
existed in it's current form for some time and is how any backend interfaces
with qiskit. We need to keep this around not just for a smooth transition to
the new interface but also for providers that are not maintained by our team.
We want to maximize compatibility with any providers that exist out there and
removing the current interface would potentially break a lot of people. The

> second is to simplify the maintanence around this existing interface. Right

Reviewer: ```suggestion
second is to simplify the maintenance around this existing interface. Right
```

> now the interface for interacting with providers is too obfuscated creating a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
now the interface for interacting with providers is too obfuscated. Creating a
```

flat object makes it much simpler to work with when we need to make additions
or changes to keep the interface functioning. It also makes it easier for local
simulators to use C aligned data structures natively because everything is
just a normal python attribute and doesn't go through marshmallow's
transformation layer. The third is that doing this will greatly improves
performance. In Qiskit/qiskit-terra#3383 for assembling a qobj for 100
experiments of circuits with 53 qubits and a depth of 2048 took < 2min with the
PR removing marshmallow and 3min and 40 seconds with master (object generation
is also significantly faster, and more importantly uses far less memory).

This also starts the process of decoupling IQX's API from the provider interface
because removing marshmallow means we don't get the 2 transformations it performs
`numpy array -> list` and `complex numbers -> [re, im]`. Basically when v1.5
starts merging we are saying that the `qobj.to_dict()`'s output is not the same
as `json.loads()` from what the ibmq provider sends on the wire.

> 

Reviewer: I would add subsections for the different sections, v1.5 and v2.0

Author: Done in: https://github.com/Qiskit/rfcs/pull/2/commits/d854980f610eacb8c2fbcda2ff2cdf1be3464cbd

that basically treats the providers interface as a python interface instead of
as a pseudo-json api. The basic idea is that we use terra's objects as the
what is passed back and forth to providers instead of the intermediate formats
that exist today.

For example, the new interface for running circuits (or pulse schedules) will
look like:

```python
qc = QuantumCircuit()
provider = my_provider()
backend = my_provider.get_backend()
backend.set_config(shots=2048)
backend.run([qc]*100)
```
The abstract classes defining this new interface will live in:
`qiskit.providers.v2` in the terra repo and for terra's functionality
that interacts with anything as part of the provider interface (eg transpiler
passes that use backend configuration) will need to check if it's using a
provider based on v1 or v2 prior to interacting with it.

A base backend abstract class will be defined as:

```python
from abc import ABC

class BaseBackend(ABC):
    def __init__(self):
        configuration = self._default_config()

    @classmethod
    @abstractmethod
    def _default_config(cls):
        pass

    def set_configuration(self, **fields):
        configuration.update_config(**fields)

    @property

>     def configuration(self):

Reviewer: Perhaps type hints would make this clearer to understand input/output.

        return self.configuration

    @abstractmethod
    def run(self, circuits):
        pass
```

With a configuration class that looks like:

```python

from abc import ABC

class Configuration(ABC):

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def num_qubits(self):
        pass

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def name(self):
        pass
```

The required fields for the base configuration are kept minimal to maximize
compatibility with all providers. Each provider is expected to define it's
own configuration subclasses which will have any extra required fields that
are specific to that backend.

On the other side of the interface, interacting with a running circuit and
it's results a new job class will be defined. This will merge in the standard
results functionality (it's still present).

```python
from abc import ABC

class BaseJob(ABC):
    """A base class for representing an async job on a backend."""

    job_id = None
    metadata = None

    def __init__(self, job_id, backend):

    def backend(self):
        return

    @abstractmethod
    def result():
        pass

    @abstractmethod
    def status():

    def cancel():

>         raise NotImplementedError

Reviewer 2: What is the benefit of raising `NotImplementedError` here? If it's an optional method, why not just leave it out of `BaseJob` (so it doesn't show up in autocomplete/docs)? If it's required, isn't `@abstractmethod` a better choice?

Author: This is to make it optional. I left it it because we want this interface to be standardized between providers that implement this feature. We don't want to leave the interface freeform but don't want to force every provider to implement it. Were you thinking of defining this somewhere else?

Reviewer 2: My main concern is that it puts the burden on the users to know whether their `job` instance supports `cancel()` (or to except `NotImplementedError`), especially since the `cancel()` method will show up in autocomplete/docs.

>         raise NotImplementedError

Reviewer 2: What is the benefit of raising `NotImplementedError` here? If it's an optional method, why not just leave it out of `BaseJob` (so it doesn't show up in autocomplete/docs)? If it's required, isn't `@abstractmethod` a better choice?

    def wait_for_final_state():
        raise NotImplementedError

>     def get_memory(self):

Reviewer 2: Per our discussion, a "job" can be used to transport other types of requests, such as transpilation or visualization. So the `get_foo()` methods don't apply to all cases and shouldn't be in `BaseJob`.

        return self.result().get_memory()

    def get_counts(self):
        return self.result().get_counts()

    def get_statevector(self):
        return self.result().get_statevector()

    def get_unitary(self):
        return self.result().get_statevector()
```

The job class is mostly the same except it is using the new fields. One thing
that has been expanded is that the result classes methods have duals here. There
are few times where you'll want or need to interact with a result directly.

```python
from abc import ABC

class Result(ABC):
    """An object representing an experiment's result"""

    @abstractmethod
    def data(self):
        pass

    def get_memory(self):
        raise NotImplementedError

    @abstractmethod
    def get_counts(self):
        """Return a Counts object for the result if applicable."""
        pass

    @abstractmethod
    def get_statevector(self):
        """Return a statevector operator object of the result if applicable."""
        pass

    @abstractmethod
    def get_unitary(self):
        """Return a unitary operator object of the result if applicable."""
        pass
```

> For the job/results interface one thing to note is that there is now a Counts

Reviewer: Excellent

class which will represent a counts result from the job (returned by
`get_counts()`). This will be a subclass of dict and the data format will be
the same as returned by `Result.get_counts()` now, but will have several helper
functions for interacting. Similarly a statevector operator object and a
unitary operator object will be returned from `get_statevector()` and
`get_unitary()` respectively.

In the v2 providers interface the conversion to ibmq's api format from the
terra objects then live in the ibmq provider, where it should live, when we
migrate it from v1 to v2. Other providers will then have more flexibility to
convert the circuit objects to whichever format is needed for interfacing the
circuit to their backends/services.

> We'll need to keep `assemble()` (and the dissasembler) in terra for backwards

Reviewer: 👍
